---
title: 2025-09-05 ink log
publish: "true"
---
Today I made pretty good progress, especially when it comes to simplifying a process that was previously difficult.

TUIs are synchronous by default; in my opinion, they act very much like a game. You have everything happening behind the scenes that controls the **state of the application**, which basically means manipulating a struct like the one below:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Chat<'a> {
    pub selected_message_id: usize,
    pub messages: Vec<Message>,
    pub textarea: TextArea<'a>,
    pub height: usize,
    pub scroll_state: usize,
    pub scroll_area: usize,
}
```

The problem is that we cannot update some things that are **asynchronous** in our code, specifically the responses from the LLM. The LLM communicates with us using a format called **JSON Lines**, which is a kind of **stream** of JSON objects that we can concatenate to form the response we see in LLM chat interfaces like ChatGPT.

Unfortunately, due to the asynchronous nature of the API, we’d have to make everything in the code asynchronous as well, which goes against the philosophy I just described. This led me to my first solution.

### Polluted struct

I call this the **polluted struct** because I needed to include two fields that would otherwise be unnecessary:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Chat<'a> {
    pub selected_message_id: usize,
    pub messages: Vec<Message>, // <- this should be updated instead
    pub textarea: TextArea<'a>,
    pub height: usize,
    pub scroll_state: usize,
    pub scroll_area: usize,
    /// unnecessary fields
    pub response: Arc<Mutex<String>>,
    pub is_generating: Arc<Mutex<bool>>,
}
```

These fields were freaking me out, to be honest, because what I actually wanted was to update the **messages** vector and modify the last item of that vector as the stream of data progressed, giving the feeling of text that grows over time.

### Channels

So I tried to come up with a better approach when I discovered that channels are a thing in Rust. I always get excited that Rust has so much to offer and is so nice to code in. If you’re not familiar, channels are the most common way for threads to communicate with each other. I first learned the concept of channels when learning **Golang**, and it already seemed magical at the time.

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Chat<'a> {
    pub selected_message_id: usize,
    pub messages: Vec<Message>,
    pub textarea: TextArea<'a>,
    /// the total height of the chat screen including the entire chat history
    pub height: usize,
    /// used to render the scrollbar, represents where
    /// in the scroll_area the scrollbar is located
    pub scroll_state: usize,
    /// used to render the scrollbar, represents
    /// how much space the scrollbar has for scrolling
    pub scroll_area: usize,
    rx: mpsc::Receiver<Chunk>,
    tx: mpsc::Sender<Chunk>,
}
```

You basically have the **Receiver** and the **Sender** in Rust. The receiver can poll for messages, and the sender, as the name implies, can send messages through the channel. A threaded application like mine can therefore support very natural communication: I can send messages that include the chunks of data being processed in a separate thread, while my application flow continues normally.